[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Opinionated, grouchy,
not tall enough,
and all of those are
quite trite answers.
I guess really, if I had to
describe myself, I would say,
I'm Croatian, and I'm a
mother, and I'm a wife,
and I'm a milliner,
and that most of all,
I would describe
myself as lucky.
Yeah, he's got a
tummy ache, hasn't he?
The next day was Sunday,
and the caterpillar
ate through-- what's this one?
Nice, big--
>> Not hungry anymore.
>> No, he's not hungry anymore.
We lived in London for 11 years.
So I worked at the Victoria
Palace Theater backstage,
and then I got a permanent
job at the Savoy Theatere,
and then I retrained
to be a milliner
and worked at Covent Garden.
I've always liked making things.
I think my dad probably
had a lot to do with it.
He was one of those
immigrant men that
just had an enormous shed,
and rebuilt the house,
and if the roof needed fixing,
he just did it himself.
Mom and dad gave me
a car when I turned
18, which was an old banger
that kept breaking down,
and so I used to drive
dad's '67 Fairlane
and drag the boys at the lights.
And so when we moved
back to Australia,
one of the things we talked
about was wanting an old car,
so we found our Falcon.
I love that it's pink.
I like that it has
Venetian blinds
and a falcon on the Bonnet.
Nick and I had a really
good life together that
was completely self-indulgent.
We traveled a lot.
We had a lot of friends.
We had a great social life.
And there was-- there was a
lot of talk for a lot of years
about whether we were too
selfish to have children,
whether we even wanted to give
up enough to have children.
And then my brother
had his little girl,
and we both fell
in love with her,
and that kind of
clinched it for us.
I don't think it was
so specific in my mind
that I wanted a home birth.
What I had known for years
was that I didn't ever
want to give birth
in a hospital.
I'd had a couple of
operations in the UK.
I remember having surgery
once to remove a coil that
had poked through the
wall of my uterus,
and so it was emergency surgery.
I was absolutely traumatized
by what was happening to me.
I was in a gown on an
operating table surrounded
by five men who were all joking
and laughing in a language
that I didn't understand,
and not one of them
looked me in the eye.
Not one of them told
me I would be OK.
I didn't even know
who they were.
I assumed that they
were assistants.
I didn't think that they were
surgeons, but I had no idea.
I had developed this
kind of weird almost
terror of hospitals.
And so when I got
pregnant, we really
had to talk about where
I was going to feel safe.
And so I contacted Dr. Peter
Lucas at Wattle Park House,
because I've been told that he
was a home birth obstetrician
and he had two midwives
working out of his surgery.
So we made an appointment
and met Jan, our midwife.
Instantly, we fell
in love with her.
She was warm and generous.
I have never felt so well
or so strong or so capable
or so frightened by what
people were telling me.
So my pregnancy was
interesting in that there
was potential complications.
There was an issue over the
scar on my uterus from when
the coil had pushed
through and whether that
would cause a
weakness in my uterus
if I had a vaginal birth.
I had the glucose test,
and it came back positive.
And so part of that
was that every two
weeks I went to the diabetes
clinic at the hospital
to have my results looked
at, talk about nutrition,
do all of that stuff that
theoretically is a really
good thing, except I went--
it was quite late on.
I think I was about seven
weeks from Nate's birth,
and he hadn't turned around yet.
So I saw a woman
obstetrician, and you think--
as a woman, I've always
gravitated towards female GPs,
thought I would be in
more empathetic hands
with a female obstetrician,
and as it turned out,
this woman was a
complete fuckwit.
She told me that seven weeks
out, there was no chance
that Nate would turn.
She told me that unless I
booked myself in for a cesarean,
that Nate and/or I would die.
And I said to her--
I couldn't believe what she'd
said to me and I said to her,
are you seriously telling
me that my baby will die?
And she said, babies
don't turn this late.
And I said, well,
I'll try everything.
I'll try acupuncture.
I have a lot of acupuncture
it works very well for me.
And she told me that
believing in acupuncture
was about as medically
relevant as believing in God.
This woman knew
nothing about me.
I could have been
a devout Christian.
I could have been a devout Jew.
It doesn't matter.
What she was basically
saying to me was everything
I felt was wrong, and
unless I did it her way,
my baby was going to die.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
The day after I'd
seen the obstetrician,
we had an appointment with Jan,
and I'd called her that day
in floods of tears.
She talked me down, told me
everything would be fine,
to come tomorrow and
we'd talk about it.
She checked him, she checked
me, she said that we were fine
and to just give it a few more
weeks and see how he went,
and he turned.
And so I'd managed it
really well and none of this
was a problem except when I
got sucked into the fear thing.
I went back to my GP for
something completely unrelated,
and she asked how my
pregnancy was going.
I told her what had
happened at the hospital,
and this woman looked
me in the eye--
I mean, this was a
woman I'd trusted.
She'd been my GP
for a few years.
I'd found her really open
and honest and caring,
and she looked me in
the eye and she told me
that an elective Cesarean
was a perfectly pleasant way
to bring a baby into the world.
And I just thought
I was going mad.
I just couldn't believe
that I was surrounded
by so many women who were so
determined that slicing open
my abdomen and
pulling my baby out
was the best thing for me to do.
>> So were you
confused by all that?
>> No.
What it made me realize
is that the choices
that I'd made about
what was good for me
and the baby I was
carrying were right,
that my instincts were
right, that my midwife was,
along with Nick, the best people
to be with me during my labor.
So we got to 42 weeks, we were
seeing Jan a lot at that point.
Nate hadn't quite engaged
fully, and he showed no signs
at all of coming.
I mean, we were both very happy.
I could've easily done
another three months.
And most women
look at me like I'm
a crazy person when I said that,
but we really were very happy.
Jan said that she would
like me to have a scan,
and she was happy for me
if everything carried on
to go for a little while
longer, but that she wanted
me to have a scan just
to check that everything
was fine with the baby.
The woman doing the ultrasound
tutted a bit and said,
I'm just going to go and get
my supervisor, and went away,
and no one came back.
So I'm getting progressively
more and more stressed,
saying to Nick,
something's wrong,
something terrible is wrong.
He must be alive, because
I can feel him kicking,
but something terrible is wrong.
And what had happened
was they'd forgotten.
And so when Nick
finally went out to say,
is someone coming
back, we found out
that my fluid levels
were really quite low.
So it meant that
Nate was getting
kind of wrinkly in there.
It probably meant that
I needed to be induced.
If I wasn't going to
go into labor normally,
it probably meant that I needed
to be induced a bit more.
They didn't want him
to go into distress.
They were OK with me going
home for five or six hours.
And Jan was basically saying,
let's hope you go into labor.
If you go into labor
and everything's fine
and you're safe and
the baby's safe,
we'll just carry on at
home and see how you go.
So of course, in what was
becoming a bit of a pattern,
I didn't go into labor.
So we went back that afternoon
and had my waters broken
and I went into labor.
I was OK with the fact
that I was in a hospital.
I'd kind of dealt
with all of that.
We'd taken our fairy
lights with us.
Nick was there, Jan
was there, but then it
became an issue of fighting
against policy and procedure.
Because they'd broken
my waters, they
wanted to put me on a drip, and
I didn't want to go on a drip
because I didn't want the
contractions to become
unnatural and painful, and
then that whole cascade
of intervention that
people talk about,
I didn't want any of that.
And so it really was a bit like
beating them off with a stick.
And eventually, Nick growled at
a midwife and said, she's fine.
Her contractions are good.
She doesn't need a drip.
Things kind of went
OK for a while.
I was thinking, OK, I might be
in hospital, but Jan's with me.
It's all fine.
And then I got to 5
centimeters, and Nate
rolled over and went to sleep,
and I stopped contracting.
Jan came in and asked
Nick how I was doing,
and he said, oh, she's
quietened down a bit.
And Jan felt my stomach,
and for the first time,
I heard Jan say, oh,
well, that's not so great.
And because she'd always been
so positive, so matter of fact,
so unflappable, even kind of in
that primal place in my head,
I started to think,
this isn't so good.
Something's going wrong
and Nate had rolled over.
And so then as my
contractions were coming,
I wasn't dilating anymore.
And he'd basically
sat on my spine,
so we were spine
to spine, and so
that pain of him
sitting on my spine
was getting harder
and harder and harder,
and then my contractions
over the top of that,
then I started to shake.
And we'd had this
whole conversation
about I don't think
this is necessarily
going to happen naturally.
When they finally saw me, a very
sympathetic, very young woman
said to me, I think we need
to give you a Cesarean.
I stalled and stalled and
stalled, eventually spoke
to Jan, and she said, I
think this is probably
what we need to do.
So then I talked to them about,
if this is what we have to do,
I want to be awake, I
want Nick to be with me,
I want Jan to be with me.
I don't want anyone to tell
me what sex my baby is.
I don't want--
I don't want you to cut the cord
if you can possibly help it.
If you do have to cut the cord,
I want you to cut it long.
And I said to them, if we--
I'd like it to be really quiet.
I didn't want Nate arriving in--
I wanted Nate to come surrounded
by his family in his home,
in his living room.
I wanted it to be peaceful
and calm and welcoming.
And what I didn't want
was him to be wrenched out
of me in an operating
theater with noise and light
and stress.
And in the end, they were
very gentle and quiet.
And there's a picture I have
of him being lifted out,
and he looks like he's asleep.
Although it wasn't the
birth I wanted for him,
and it wasn't the
way I wanted to birth
my child, what was most
important was that he was safe
and that I was safe.
And we were safe.
But what made it OK was
that every step of the way,
Jan was there.
It's the most miraculous
thing I have ever done.
And I've done some
really good stuff.
I've had a lot of
fun in my life.
I've traveled a lot.
I've seen extraordinary
things and I've
been in extraordinary
situations,
but there is nothing in my
life that has ever compared
to the birth of my son.
One.
>> One ice cream.
>> Yeah.
One.
What's this?
Nate?
>> Pickle.
>> A pickle.